## Project 4: Data Lake

### Description
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their
data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app,
as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
We need to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, 
and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. 
This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

--------------------------------------------

### Datasets

#### Song Dataset
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by 
the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

Example:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

#### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the 
dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are 
filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}
```

--------------------------------------------
### ETL Process

1. Load the credentials from dl.cfg
2. Read the data which are in JSON Files (Song Data and Log Data) from S3.
3. After loading the JSON files from S3, use Spark to process JSON files and  generate a set of fact and dimension tables
4  Load back these dimensional process to S3. Each of the five tables are written to parquet files.
--------------------------------------------

## Database schema

### Fact Table
<b>songplays</b> - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong 
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
<b>users</b> - users in the app user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

<b>songs</b> - songs in music database song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

<b>artists</b> - artists in music database artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

<b>time</b> - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

--------------------------------------------
### Structure of project

The project includes files:
* <b> /data </b> - a folder that cointains two zip files, helpful for data exploration
* <b> etl.py </b> - the ETL engine done with Spark, reads data from S3, processes that data and writes them back to S3.
* <b> dhw.cfg </b> - configuration file that contains AWS Credentials
* <b> README.md </b> - explination of process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.
--------------------------------------------

### How to Execute Code

1. Write correct keys in dl.cfg
2. Open terminal and write the command "python etl.py"